So in the previous video,
we stored some strings in variables but we
didn't really explain what was going on.
So we wanna go through and
actually explain what is happening
a little bit more now behind the scenes.
So when the Python programming is running,
everything the program needs ends up being
stored somewhere in the computer's memory.
You don't actually need to know
where that is because the computer
actually tracks that.
For the program code itself, in other
words the instructions that you type in,
will be stored in one area of memory, but
also the data that it's gonna work on,
the variables that you've typed in etc.,
will be stored somewhere else in memory.
So the variable,
the name that we assigned is just really
a way to give a meaningful name to
a area of memory into which we can place
certain values like strings and so forth.
So when we create a variable called
greeting like greeting = Bruce.
Python's actually allocating an area
of computer memory for us, and
it knows to refer to that area whenever
we talk about the variable greeting.
So think of it like a box in memory that's
storing the values, Bruce in this case,
and the box has got a name on,
a sticker on it that says greeting.
And when we type in greeting,
the computer knows to go and
find the value that's
in that particular box.
So that all happens
automatically behind the scenes.
Just in terms of creating
these variable names,
there are a few rules to keep in
mind when you actually created them.
Firstly, the actual name has to start with
either a letter, it could be upper or
lower case, or an underscore.
So in other words,
we can type _myName = Tim, that's valid.
So a variable name can start with
either the letter or an underscore but
we can't start with a number.
Actually get an error.
But we can actually also use letters.
We can also use numbers in our variable
names, just not as the first letter.
So, we can put something
like Tim45 = Good.
That's quite valid and
we could put a combination.
So we could put Tim_Was_57 = Hello and
that's quite valid as well.
Now the other important thing to
consider here is that I could also
type a variable name called Greeting,
with uppercase G.
And that's different and
distinct to this variable name.
So that one's all in lowercase,
this one's got an uppercase first letter.
Even though the actual word is the same,
they are treated as different variable
names as far as Python is concerned.
Now in terms of the allocation of memory,
it actually happens at the point
that you've initialized it.
So in other words once you've talked in
the variable name and put an equal and
then the value, at that point
python will allocate the space for
that in the computers memory.
In terms of using variables
we saw that we could
use the prints statement
to print some out.
We could do something like TIm was here,
or
Tim was 57 + a single-quote
space plus greeting.
We could run thatm, Hello Bruce.
Obviously it's taking the value
of Hello from Tim_Was_57 and
Bruce from the variable greeting and
actually printing that on the screen
with a space between the two there.
We could do something like age equals 24,
print age.
We can also do something like greeting
plus age, since we're on this program.
Now this is where we
actually get an error.
So you can see it should the first
Hello Bruce which we saw before,
which was this first line.
We then assigned a value of 24 to
the variable age, and we printed the age,
which 24 worked.
We're going to try to do this next line,
print greeting plus age.
And we actually got an error in red.
And you can see that Python's actually
trying to help you here by actually sort
of saying, look I've got
a problem with what you've typed.
It's actually come up and actually said,
I can't convert int object to a string.
Str is the abbreviation
of string implicitly.
So what we've tried to do is Get it to do
something that Python can't work with, and
this is what happens
when you get an error.
So Python will hopefully show you some
information which hopefully leads to you
figuring out what the problem was, and
it actually shows also the actual lines.
So if we move over a little bit you can
see it's saying the name of the Python
file which was one that I created for
this video varibles.py py.
And it says that line 12,
which equates to line 12 over here.
So it's very handy to look at these when
you trying to figure out whether there's
a problem, and you can go back to line 12,
and know this was where the problem was.
Now the other thing is that IntelliJ
actually does a lot of this for
you automatically as well, it tries
to help you out with hints as well.
So, over here we can see
these little dashes.
If I actually hover over
there with my mouse,
we actually get a helpful error message.
Expected type string str got int instead.
So that's IntelliJ, trying to
give you some information to say,
you've got this wrong, basically.
And so it can be really useful when
you're creating Python programs to keep
checking these hints out to see
whether there actually is an issue.
Notice also there's a keyboard shortcut,
if you want to expand this to
get some more information.
So on a Mac, I can actually type Cmd + F1,
I get more information like so.
And press Ctrl + F1 on Windows machine or
a Linux machine and
you can get the full message.
So that's very handy to refer
to that all the time, and
later in the course we'll be
looking at handling these errors.
In other words, if you're program
crashes or goes to crash,
we can handle that more gracefully.
But for now, think of those error messages
that come up as your friend because what
it's really doing, it's telling you
that your code is not gonna work and
providing as much information as
possible to you to help you try and
figure out what the solution is.
So what can be frustrating, you really
did learn a lot from errors like these,
because you can figure out something
that Python doesn't like, and
how to work around that to come
up with actually a solution.
Okay, so moving on,
and later in the course we'll be
talking about these conversions.
So, in terms of this particular error
message, what's actually happening was
again we determined that Python wasn't
happy because we're trying to add the age,
the numeric variable age to a number,
and you can't actually do that.
It doesn't actually work like that.
So Python doesn't know what
to do in that scenario.
It knows what to do in
the situation like this,
we're actually adding strings together.
Because Tim_Was_57 is a string, and
greeting was a string and
it knows to concatenate those.
Likewise, if we tried it to do
something with two numbers,
it knows to add to some
of those two numbers.
But in this scenario where
we've got a string and
a number, Python doesn't
actually know how to do that.
Not know how to handle that and
that's why we actually got the message.
So what we dealing more with
actually how to get around that.
And do note that some other programming
languages, Java being one of them,
does actually allow you to
actually do something like that.
And in that scenario what would happen is
it would actually automatically convert
what you're trying to do.
In this case, it would append
the value of 24 to the string age.
But Python doesn't do that,
it makes you get it right at the start.
And that's actually a good thing in
many ways because it means you're not
going to be getting any weird
little bugs that crept about
because of automatic type conversion.
That you may get in other
programming languages.
So the bottom line is,
you need to get that right first, and
really it's just a matter of checking
out the error message and fixing it.
And we're talking more about this type of
thing as the course progresses anyway.
So moving on, let's talk now
a little bit about variable types.
So Python has got several
built-in data types.
We've got a heap of them and
we'll be dealing with those in detail.
Data types can be classified as numerics,
sequences, mappings, files,
classes, instances, and exceptions.
And I [LAUGH] know that sounds
like a lot and it probably is but
you'll be introduced to all of
these as the course progresses.
But for now we're gonna look
at numeric data types and
one of the sequence types
which you've already seen.
String being a sequence type,
which we've actually looked at before.
Now Python 2, the older version of
python which as I mention is no longer
being used and
we're not using it in this course.
That actually had various data types
such as int, long, float, and complex,
but in Python 3 the change they've made
is there's no longer a long type, and
the int now behaves like a long used to.
So they've really consolidated
the amount of data types.
Now we're not going to
discuss complex numbers
without going into too much detail.
A complex number contains a real and
an imaginary part based on
the square root of minus one.
Now, if you understand a complex number
and wanna use Pyton to manipulate them,
then by the end of the course you'll
understand Python well enough to do so.
But really the complex number theories
in advance branch of mathematics slash
engineering, it's not really appropriate
to go into too much detail with that.
But let's look at the basic data types,
and
a basic data type we're going
to start with an integer.
An integer being a whole number so a
number that hasn't got any decimal points.
First, you can see on the screen
I have typed in an integer.
So an integer is a just whole number.
It's a number having no
fractional part where as a float
in the other example is another name for
a real number.
That is a number having a fractional
part after the decimal point.
There is a very small number of computer
languages that make no distinction between
real numbers and integers.
I guess you could say that
integers can be considered
just special cases of real numbers.
But when represented in a computer,
computations using integers,
these whole numbers, are significantly
faster than using floating point numbers.
So that's one of the main reasons that
we actually distinguish in programming
an integer as a whole number and
a real number,
a floating point number and that's
because it's a lot faster to process.
So anything that doesn't need, as a
general rule, a floating point number for
calculation purposes,
you shouldn't actually be using it.
Because you'll find that your programs
will operate a lot faster because of it.
There are pros and cons, because of
the way that integers are stored in
the computer's memory, there's actually
a limit to the size of an int.
It's about 9 trillion in European terms.
I think it's nine quintillion,
in American format.
But effectively the Python 2
long data type the Python 3,
effectively have no real maximum size.
Now floating point numbers
on the other hand,
that's floats, they're used to represent
numbers having a fractional part.
So the maximum float value on a 64 bit
computer is, well that's, it's just huge,
we'll go through it, but it's quite large.
Basically a number that actually moves
the decimal point 308 places to the right.
And the smallest float is a negative
number which has 307 zeros before
the decimal float.
So, it's obviously a huge variance and
a huge number can be stored in
that floating point number.
Floating points have 52 digits of
precision, which should be adequate for
most purposes from financial calculations
where you're needing decimals.
And because Python doesn't really
have variable declarations,
that's where you specify the type of
a variable before you can use it, and
lots of other computer languages do that.
It's probably tempting to think that you
don't need to understand the difference
between an int, a long,
and a float type, but
really it is something you really need
to consider when writing your programs.
This makes more sense when we look
at some of the operators that can be
performed on numbers.
So let's just go through
the first few scenarios.
So I typed a variable called
a with an integer value of 12.
Let's do another one, b = 3.
And let's perform some calculations.
We'll do print, we'll do a plus b,
we should get the value of 15,
a take b, we should get the value of nine.
Print, a times b, the value of 36,
we should get and we'll test this shortly.
a divided by b,
we should get the answer four, but
there's a special rule there about
that which I will talk about shortly.
And we're going to introduce
another operator, //b and
I'll explain that shortly, and last one
we're going to use is the remainder,
remainder of a divided by b effectively.
Otherwise dividing 12 by 3,
how much remainder is left after that.
So let's just run this, and
then we'll just go through it.
So the first one is 15.
The second one is 9.
And the third value is 36.
And there's the fourth one,
a divided by b.
The actual answer is returned as a float,
with a decimal point, .0.
And that's the thing to keep in mind,
with a divide,
a division operation, in Python,
by default it returns as a float.
If you want the result
to return as an integer,
a whole number, you need to use
the two slashes in this case.
So a, slash slash b,
returns four as a whole number.
And lastly,
the remainder of a divided by b was
zero because b goes into a four times.
Four times three is twelve and
there would be no remainder.
So that's how you do some
basic calculations in Python.
Now this slash and
slash slash can really trip you up, and
we're gonna be talking about loops later.
But I just want to give you an example of
typing in a loop where you could get into
difficulty without using that slash or
slash slash because it can be
a common source of problems.
So let's look at an example here.
We're gonna type in some code, and
again we'll talk more about this for, and
the concept of loops later.
But for now we'll just type in for
i in range, 1, 4, : print i.
So if we run this,
You get the values 1, 2, 3.
We've actually changed this here and
put a divided by b, cuz instead
of putting a constant number, a literal,
we can actually put an expression like so.
If we run that, we actually get an error.
And that's because float object
cannot be interpreted as an integer,
and that's because the answer,
if you remember, with division by
default is a floating point number.
The range actually needs an integer, so
we'd actually put two
slashes in that scenario.
Run the code again, it actually correctly
returns the results one, two, and three.
As we progress through the course, you'll
see other ways of actually handling this,
but I just wanted to point that out.
At this point in time, that's a common
source of problems when you're
looking at Python for the first time.
And again, don't be too worried about
the concepts of what this is doing,
we'll be covering loops, which is what
this actually is In future videos.
So the code something like a plus b,
that's actually an expression and
I mentioned expressions.
In Python an expression is anything that
can be calculated to return a value.
So we've really only used simple
expressions to date like a plus b or
a take b but
we can get a lot more complex.
We could do something,
just let me clear some space here.
So a lot more complex if we want to,
we can do something like
print (a + b / 3- 4 * 12),
and that's quite a valid expression.
So if we actually run this, you might
be surprised to look at that and think,
why is that come up with a value of 35?
You'd expect looking at that,
that the answer should actually be 12.
It should be a plus b is 15 divided by
3 is 5, take 4 is 1, times 12 is 12.
So why have we actually
got 35 here instead of 12?
[LAUGH] Now don't worry,
your computer's not broken.
And you can reliably perform
arithmetic in Python.
But, as is the case in all
programming languages,
you have to understand some of the basic
rules of the arithmetic operators.
Out problem here is operator precedence.
Now operator precedence
is a fancy term for
the relative importance given
to each of the operators.
If all operators were equal, we'll get
the expression how I read it earlier.
By calculating a plus b is 15 divided by
three is 5 take 4 is 1 time 12 is 12.
But the thing to remember
is multiplication and
division have higher operator precedence
than addition and subtraction.
So those operators are performed first.
And most languages you'll
find working the same way so
this is not just peculiar to Python.
So what's actually happening is b divided
by 3, this is actually happening first.
So, b divided by 3 is happening first,
which is 1.
Then 4 times 12 is added, which is 48.
So the expression is actually evaluated
as 12 plus one is 13, take 48,
which is negative 35.
That's weird, but that's the way
it actually happens by default
because multiplication and division, as I
mentioned, have got a higher precedence.
So the case where you've actually got
expressions that use just those operators,
they will actually work
from left to right.
So we can type a divided
by two times three,
and that should give us the answer
of four times three is 12.
So we run that,
we actually get the answer of twelve and
even something like eight
times three divided by two.
24 divided by two is 12,
we get the answer correct.
Then the best way to
actually overcome this,
if you want your expressions to be clear
and unambiguous to use parenthesis freely,
even when Python doesn't
specifically require them.
So, in our earlier example, the one
that didn't work, this first line here.
So we could do something like, print,
a plus b, divide it by three,
take four, times 12.
Now that's a lot of brackets there but
what we're doing is we're actually putting
the expressions in parentheses to make
it clear what we're trying to perform.
And when we actually run it we're actually
correct, you now have the answer 12.
So you can see we've got a plus b in its
own set of brackets, that's gonna be 15.
But then outside to that there's this
bracket here, which covers that.
So therefore, that calculation is now
15 divided by three, which is five.
Then take four from that is one,
then multiply by 12, is 12,
and that's why we're
getting the answer of 12.
Okay, so I'm gonna stop the video here.
In the next video we're gonna continue
on talking about variables and
operator precedence etc.
So I'll see you in the next video.